README.md, before:

# lsarp_gwas

Description of GWAS pipeline developed for LSARP project. Pipeline scripts (but not data) are additionally tracked via git and backed up to a GitHub repository.  

## Pipeline Overview

This pipeline generates a table of unitigs (unique sequences that are present in > 1% of < 99% of the input genomes) that are significantly associated with a phenotype after controlling for population structure using a linear mixed model (LMM) implemented in the software pyseer. 

The general pipeline is as follows:

```
de novo assemblies -> annotations -> core genome alignment -> phylogeny -> similarity matrix
        |
        V
      unitigs

similiarity matrix + unitigs + phenotype -> LMM -> significant unitigs -> annotated unitigs -> phylogeny annotation
                                                                                   |
                                                                                   V        
                                                                            Manhattan plot

```
Details of the software used can be found by reading the Snakefile.

### Core genome alignment and phylogeny
Genomes are annotated with Prokka v 1.14 [1] using genus specific databases when available, and the core genome is identified using Roary v 3.13 [2] with a 95% identity cutoff and aligned with MAFFT [3]. To understand the population structure of our dataset, we generate a maximum likelihood phylogeny [4], which is based on the core genome alignment.
### Unitig presence matrix
To summarize the genomic variation in our sample, unitigs (unique sequences of variable length) are identified and counted using unitig-counter (https://github.com/johnlees/unitig-counter), which uses a compressed de Bruijn graph and is based on the approach in DBGWAS [5].
### Genome wide association study (GWAS) using linear mixed model (LMM)
To identify genetic variants associated with a phenotype of interest, we perform bacterial GWAS as implemented in pyseer v 1.3.6 [6]. We use LMM to control for population structure by including a similarity matrix generated from the phylogeny in the model. Unitig significance is determined with a likelihood ratio test and a Bonferroni-corrected p-value threshold based on the number of unique unitig presence/absence patterns.
### Unitig annotation and visualization 
Unitigs are annotated by mapping to a panel of closed, reference genomes representing each of the major clades or clonal complexes present in the dataset. Additionally, all unitigs are mapped to a single reference genome containing the gene content associated with the most significant unitigs for visualization (i.e. Manhattan plots). The presence of significant unitigs is displayed across the phylogeny using ITOL [7].
### References
1. 	Seemann T. Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 2014; 30:2068–2069. 
2. 	Page AJ, Cummins CA, Hunt M, et al. Roary: rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis. Bioinformatics 2015; 31:3691–3693. 
3. 	Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT: iterative refinement and additional methods. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ 2014; 1079:131–146. 
4. 	Croucher NJ, Page AJ, Connor TR, et al. Rapid phylogenetic analysis of large samples of recombinant bacterial whole genome sequences using Gubbins. Nucleic Acids Res 2015; 43:e15–e15. 
5. 	Jaillard M, Lima L, Tournoud M, et al. A fast and agnostic method for bacterial genome-wide association studies: Bridging the gap between k-mers and genetic events. PLOS Genet 2018; 14:e1007758. 
6. 	Lees JA, Galardini M, Bentley SD, Weiser JN, Corander J. pyseer: a comprehensive tool for microbial pangenome-wide association studies. Bioinforma Oxf Engl 2018; 34:4310–4312. 
7. 	Letunic I, Bork P. Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v4: recent updates and new developments. Nucleic Acids Res.



## Software Requirements

This pipeline is implemented in snakemake. Additionally, there are some helper scripts that are not packaged with pyseer via conda, so the pyseer git repository should be cloned to a software/ directory. Other required software is installed via conda as the pipeline runs. 

### conda

Miniconda3 can be installed from https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html.

### Snakemake

Snakemake can be installed via conda. Instructions here: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html

This pipeline uses a snakemake profile to interact with the slurm job submission system on ARC.

Template config file to be stored in `$HOME/.config/snakemake/slurm/config.yaml`:

```
restart-times: 3
cluster: "sbatch -t {resources.time} --nodes 1 --ntasks 1 --cpus-per-task {resources.cpus} --mem={resources.mem_mb} -o logs/slurm/{rule}_{wildcards}.out -e logs/slurm/{rule}_{wildcards}.err"
default-resources: [cpus=1, mem_mb=1000, time=60]
max-jobs-per-second: 1
max-status-checks-per-second: 10
local-cores: 1
use-conda: true
conda-prefix: /home/ARC_USERNAME/miniconda3/
jobs: 100
rerun-incomplete: true
```
### pyseer

The majority of pyseer components are installed via conda as part of the snakemake pipeline. However, the pipeline does require some helper scripts. To ensure the helper scripts can be found by the pipeline, run the following in the directory where you will be running the pipeline:

```
mkdir -p software/
cd software/
git clone https://github.com/mgalardini/pyseer.git
```

## Pipeline Components

### Snakefile

### start_snakemake.sh
Job submission script for running the pipeline (submit with `sbatch`).

### conda_envs/
Files describing conda environments for required pipeline software. 

### scripts/

#### fastbaps.R
Example script for running fastbaps to assign BAPS groups using an alignment and phylogeny as input. 
(Not currently used by GWAS pipeline)

#### filter_significant_unitigs.R
Gets the appropriate Bonferroni corrected significance threshold from pyseer output and filters pyseer unitig output.

#### get_mlst.py
Summarizes MLST output from pipeline results for all samples.
(Not currently used by GWAS pipeline)

## Input Details

### data/sequenced_isolates.txt
A tab-delimited list of sequenced isolates with batch numbers and alternate ids used in WGS data.

Format:
```
BATCH   WGS_ID                  ISOLATE_NBR
pilot   BI-16-0013_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0013
pilot   BI-16-0017_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0017
pilot   BI-16-0028_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0028
```
### data/contaminated_isolates.txt
A list of WGS_IDs with evidence of contamination (will not be included in downstream analysis).

Format:
```
WGS_ID
BI_17_0054
BI-16-0629_MOCUDI_4
BI-16-0089_MOCUDI_3
```

### phenotype file
The file with phenotypic information for the GWAS. Binary phenotypes should be represented by 0 or 1. This file should be stored in `data/phenotype1/phenotype1.txt` (with the actual phenotype name, not the word "phenotype1")

Format:

```
WGS_ID                  BATCH   phenotype1
BI-16-0013_MOCUDI_3     pilot   1.36990875
BI-16-0017_MOCUDI_3     pilot   0.80548875
BI-16-0028_MOCUDI_3     pilot   1.11414875
```
### Directory Structure

```
GWAS_directory/
    Snakefile
    start_snakemake.sh
    conda_envs/
    data/
        sequenced_isolates.txt
        contaminated_isolates.txt
        phenotype1/
            phenotype1.txt
    scripts/
    software/
        pyseer/

```

## Output Details

### unitigs

Unitigs generated using unitig-caller (https://github.com/johnlees/unitig-counter)

### annotations

Annotations generated by Prokka (https://github.com/tseemann/prokka)

### roary

Pan-genome analysis by Roary (https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/Roary/)

### gubbins

Recombination detection and phylogeny by Gubbins (https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/gubbins/)

### gwas output (directory named by phenotype)

#### significance_limits.txt
File describing appropriate Bonferroni corrected significance threshold for unitig p-values

#### unitig_patterns.txt
File used to calculate the number of unique unitig presence/absence patterns in the dataset (used for Bonferroni correction)

#### unitig_significance_filtered.txt
File containing information for significant unitigs only

#### unitig_significance.txt
File containing information for all tested unitigs

## Interpretation of Significant Unitigs

Commit message:

added argument parsing to unitig ITOL script

README.md, after:

# lsarp_gwas

Description of GWAS pipeline developed for LSARP project. Pipeline scripts (but not data) are additionally tracked via git and backed up to a GitHub repository.  

## Pipeline Overview

This pipeline generates a table of unitigs (unique sequences that are present in > 1% of < 99% of the input genomes) that are significantly associated with a phenotype after controlling for population structure using a linear mixed model (LMM) implemented in the software pyseer. 

The general pipeline is as follows:

```
de novo assemblies -> annotations -> core genome alignment -> phylogeny -> similarity matrix
        |
        V
      unitigs

similiarity matrix + unitigs + phenotype -> LMM -> significant unitigs -> annotated unitigs -> phylogeny annotation
                                                                                   |
                                                                                   V        
                                                                            Manhattan plot

```
Details of the software used can be found by reading the Snakefile.

### Core genome alignment and phylogeny
Genomes are annotated with Prokka v 1.14 [1] using genus specific databases when available, and the core genome is identified using Roary v 3.13 [2] with a 95% identity cutoff and aligned with MAFFT [3]. To understand the population structure of our dataset, we generate a maximum likelihood phylogeny [4], which is based on the core genome alignment.
### Unitig presence matrix
To summarize the genomic variation in our sample, unitigs (unique sequences of variable length) are identified and counted using unitig-counter (https://github.com/johnlees/unitig-counter), which uses a compressed de Bruijn graph and is based on the approach in DBGWAS [5].
### Genome wide association study (GWAS) using linear mixed model (LMM)
To identify genetic variants associated with a phenotype of interest, we perform bacterial GWAS as implemented in pyseer v 1.3.6 [6]. We use LMM to control for population structure by including a similarity matrix generated from the phylogeny in the model. Unitig significance is determined with a likelihood ratio test and a Bonferroni-corrected p-value threshold based on the number of unique unitig presence/absence patterns.
### Unitig annotation and visualization 
Unitigs are annotated by mapping to a panel of closed, reference genomes representing each of the major clades or clonal complexes present in the dataset. Additionally, all unitigs are mapped to a single reference genome containing the gene content associated with the most significant unitigs for visualization (i.e. Manhattan plots). The presence of significant unitigs is displayed across the phylogeny using ITOL [7].
### References
1. 	Seemann T. Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics 2014; 30:2068–2069. 
2. 	Page AJ, Cummins CA, Hunt M, et al. Roary: rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis. Bioinformatics 2015; 31:3691–3693. 
3. 	Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT: iterative refinement and additional methods. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ 2014; 1079:131–146. 
4. 	Croucher NJ, Page AJ, Connor TR, et al. Rapid phylogenetic analysis of large samples of recombinant bacterial whole genome sequences using Gubbins. Nucleic Acids Res 2015; 43:e15–e15. 
5. 	Jaillard M, Lima L, Tournoud M, et al. A fast and agnostic method for bacterial genome-wide association studies: Bridging the gap between k-mers and genetic events. PLOS Genet 2018; 14:e1007758. 
6. 	Lees JA, Galardini M, Bentley SD, Weiser JN, Corander J. pyseer: a comprehensive tool for microbial pangenome-wide association studies. Bioinforma Oxf Engl 2018; 34:4310–4312. 
7. 	Letunic I, Bork P. Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v4: recent updates and new developments. Nucleic Acids Res.



## Software Requirements

This pipeline is implemented in snakemake. Additionally, there are some helper scripts that are not packaged with pyseer via conda, so the pyseer git repository should be cloned to a software/ directory. Other required software is installed via conda as the pipeline runs. 

### conda

Miniconda3 can be installed from https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html.

### Snakemake

Snakemake can be installed via conda. Instructions here: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html

This pipeline uses a snakemake profile to interact with the slurm job submission system on ARC.

Template config file to be stored in `$HOME/.config/snakemake/slurm/config.yaml`:

```
restart-times: 3
cluster: "sbatch -t {resources.time} --nodes 1 --ntasks 1 --cpus-per-task {resources.cpus} --mem={resources.mem_mb} -o logs/slurm/{rule}_{wildcards}.out -e logs/slurm/{rule}_{wildcards}.err"
default-resources: [cpus=1, mem_mb=1000, time=60]
max-jobs-per-second: 1
max-status-checks-per-second: 10
local-cores: 1
use-conda: true
conda-prefix: /home/ARC_USERNAME/miniconda3/
jobs: 100
rerun-incomplete: true
```
### pyseer

The majority of pyseer components are installed via conda as part of the snakemake pipeline. However, the pipeline does require some helper scripts. To ensure the helper scripts can be found by the pipeline, run the following in the directory where you will be running the pipeline:

```
mkdir -p software/
cd software/
git clone https://github.com/mgalardini/pyseer.git
```

## Pipeline Components

### Snakefile

### start_snakemake.sh
Job submission script for running the pipeline (submit with `sbatch`).

### conda_envs/
Files describing conda environments for required pipeline software. 

### reference/
Directories for each species containing finished reference genomes and annotations to be used for
unitig mapping.

### scripts/

#### fastbaps.R
Example script for running fastbaps to assign BAPS groups using an alignment and phylogeny as input. 
(Not currently used by GWAS pipeline)

#### filter_significant_unitigs.R
Gets the appropriate Bonferroni corrected significance threshold from pyseer output and filters pyseer unitig output.

#### get_mlst.py
Summarizes MLST output from pipeline results for all samples.
(Not currently used by GWAS pipeline)

#### unitig_to_itol.py
Makes an annotation file that can be dragged and dropped into ITOL showing the presence and absence of a specific
unitig.

## Input Details

### data/sequenced_isolates.txt
A tab-delimited list of sequenced isolates with batch numbers and alternate ids used in WGS data.

Format:
```
BATCH   WGS_ID                  ISOLATE_NBR
pilot   BI-16-0013_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0013
pilot   BI-16-0017_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0017
pilot   BI-16-0028_MOCUDI_3     BI_16_0028
```
### data/contaminated_isolates.txt
A list of WGS_IDs with evidence of contamination (will not be included in downstream analysis).

Format:
```
WGS_ID
BI_17_0054
BI-16-0629_MOCUDI_4
BI-16-0089_MOCUDI_3
```

### phenotype file
The file with phenotypic information for the GWAS. Binary phenotypes should be represented by 0 or 1. This file should be stored in `data/phenotype1/phenotype1.txt` (with the actual phenotype name, not the word "phenotype1")

Format:

```
WGS_ID                  BATCH   phenotype1
BI-16-0013_MOCUDI_3     pilot   1.36990875
BI-16-0017_MOCUDI_3     pilot   0.80548875
BI-16-0028_MOCUDI_3     pilot   1.11414875
```
### Directory Structure

```
GWAS_directory/
    Snakefile
    start_snakemake.sh
    conda_envs/
    data/
        sequenced_isolates.txt
        contaminated_isolates.txt
        phenotype1/
            phenotype1.txt
    reference/
    scripts/
    software/
        pyseer/

```

## Output Details

### unitigs

Unitigs generated using unitig-caller (https://github.com/johnlees/unitig-counter)

### annotations

Annotations generated by Prokka (https://github.com/tseemann/prokka)

### roary

Pan-genome analysis by Roary (https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/Roary/)

### gubbins

Recombination detection and phylogeny by Gubbins (https://sanger-pathogens.github.io/gubbins/)

### gwas output (directory named by phenotype)

#### significance_limits.txt
File describing appropriate Bonferroni corrected significance threshold for unitig p-values

#### unitig_patterns.txt
File used to calculate the number of unique unitig presence/absence patterns in the dataset (used for Bonferroni correction)

#### unitig_significance_filtered.txt
File containing information for significant unitigs only

#### unitig_significance.txt
File containing information for all tested unitigs

## Interpretation of Significant Unitigs
